Transaction pool documentation - first draft (#398)
substrate-developer-hub/substrate-developer-hub.github.io: docs/conceptual/node/tx-pool.md

title: Transaction Pool
---

> The transaction pool contains all transactions (signed & unsigned) broadcasted to the network. The pool is responsible for:

Reviewer: Not sure how detailed you want to be in the first sentence, but the pool contains at most "all transaction broadcast to the network". And in almost all cases it contains strictly fewer transactions. Specifically it doesn't contain:
1. Transactions already included in blocks.
2. Transactions already determined to be invalid
3. Transactions broadcast, but not yet received by the local node

Author: Yeh I 'd like to keep the first sentence more sharp, but i've added in points (2) & (3) that you made! Happy for (1) to be woven in there if the majority would like it inserted.

Reviewer: I think 1 is probably self-evident

> 1) Checking if transactions are valid or invalid. For example, ensuring the account that issued the transaction has enough funds to pay the associated fees.

Reviewer 2: I'd add sometihng like:
`validity` of the transaction is not hard wired to the transaction pool, but rather defined by the runtime (see `validate_transaction` function). Example checks might be:
1. Transaction Index (aka nonce) correctness
2. The account has enough funds to pay for the associated fees
3. The signature is valid

Author: 👍

2) If the transaction is valid, sorting the transactions into 2 transaction queues:
   - **Ready Queue** -  Contains transactions that can be included in a new pending block and must follow the *exact* order in the ready queue.

>    - **Future Queue** - Contains transactions that *seem* valid, but the full node has yet to see the remaining transactions it depends on. For example, *Transaction B* is in the future queue and can only be included in the block after *Transaction A* has been included. However, the node is yet to see *Transaction A* in its transaction pool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - **Future Queue** - Contains transactions that *seem* valid so far, but the full node has yet to see the remaining transactions it depends on. For example, *Transaction B* is in the future queue and can only be included in a block after *Transaction A* has been included. However, the node is yet to see *Transaction A* in its transaction pool.
```

> Full nodes in the network all have their own local transaction pool and transaction queues. Therefore, full nodes can implement different strategies on how they prioritise importing transactions.

Reviewer 2: I'd add some more details to this one:
```suggestion
Full nodes in the network all have their own local transaction pool and transaction queues. Therefore, full nodes may have a different view of the queues and the transactions in the network. Depending on the runtime the strict ordering might not be required so full nodes are allowed to implement different strategies on how they prioritise propagating transactions or including them into blocks.
```

> ## Transaction Dependencies

Reviewer: This section could really benefit from a diagram of a DAG and possibly an example. @goldsteinsveta might be able to help make a diagram look nice if you provide a rough sketch (but I can't speak for her).

Author: I'll add this to my todo list for a future PR. It may take me awhile to learn more about DAG and provide a proper diagram.

> Transaction dependencies are defined by the `requires` and `provides` parameters in `ValidTransaction` to build a dependency graph of transactions. This allows the importation of transactions in a correct and linear order.

Reviewer 2: `importation` sounds a bit weird to me, I'd rephrase it and add details on the ordering.

```suggestion
Transaction dependencies are defined by the `requires` and `provides` parameters in `ValidTransaction` to build a dependency graph of transactions. Together with `priority` this allows the pool to traverse the graph and produce a valid linear ordering of transactions that should be propagated and included in the next block.
```

Reviewer: And link the rust docs https://substrate.dev/rustdocs/master/sp_runtime/transaction_validity/struct.ValidTransaction.html

For `Frame` based runtimes, an account based system is used for transaction ordering. Every signed transaction needs to contain a nonce, which is incremented by 1 every time a new transaction is made. For example, the first transaction from a new account will have `nonce=0` and the second transaction will have `nonce=1`.

> Transactions have a `provide` tag of `encode(sender ++ nonce)` and a `require` tag of `encode(sender ++ (nonce -1)) if nonce > 1`. Transactions do not `require` anything if `nonce=0`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Transactions have a `provide` tag of `encode(sender ++ nonce)` and a `require` tag of `encode(sender ++ (nonce -1)) if nonce > 1`. Transactions do not `require` anything if `nonce=0`. As a consequence all transactions coming from a single sender simply form a sequence in which they should be included.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At minimum, Frame transactions have a `provide` tag of `encode(sender ++ nonce)` and a `require` tag of `encode(sender ++ (nonce -1)) if nonce > 1`. Transactions do not `require` anything if `nonce=0`.  As a consequence all transactions coming from a single sender simply form a sequence in which they should be included.
```

Substrate supports multiple `provide` and `require` tags, so custom runtimes can create alternate dependency (ordering) schemes.

## Transaction Priority

> Transaction `priority` in the `ValidTransaction` ([struct](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/blob/95cffde19d32aa998295cbe36b20168f4dd57fee/primitives/runtime/src/transaction_validity.rs#L166)), helps determine the ordering of transactions that have their dependencies satisfied. The higher the priority number, the more important the transaction is.

Reviewer: Convention is to link rustdocs rather than code directly when possible

`Priority` helps define the linear ordering of a graph in the case of one transaction unlocking multiple dependent transactions. For example, if we have two (or more) transactions that have their dependencies satisfied, then we use `priority` to choose the order for them.

> For `Frame` based runtimes, `priority` is defined as the `fee` that the transaction is going to pay. For example, if we receive two transactions from the same sender with an identical `nonce`, only one transaction can be included on-chain. We use `priority` to choose the transaction with a higher `fee` to store in the transaction pool.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For `Frame` based runtimes, `priority` is defined as the `fee` that the transaction is going to pay. For example, if 
we receive two transactions coming from different senders (say with `nonce=0`), we use `priority` to determine which of them is more important and should go to the block first.
If however we receive two transactions from the same sender with an identical `nonce`, only one transaction can be included on-chain. We use `priority` to choose the transaction with a higher `fee` to store in the transaction pool.
```

> Note that the pool does not know about fees, accounts or signatures - it only deals with the validity of the transaction and the abstract notion of `priority`, `requires` and `provides` parameters.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that the pool does not know about fees, accounts or signatures - it only deals with the validity of the transaction and the abstract notion of `priority`, `requires` and `provides` parameters. All other details are defined by the runtime itself via `validate_transaction` implementation.
```

## Transaction Lifecycle

> There are two paths an extrinsic can follow:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are two paths a transaction can follow:
```

2. **A block is produced by our own node**

  a) Our node listens for transactions on the network.

  b) Each transaction is verified through the `validate_transaction` ([code](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/blob/20a9b15cdbed4bf962a4447e8bfb812f766f2fbc/frame/executive/src/lib.rs#L304)) function and places valid transactions in the transaction pool.

  c) The pool is responsible for ordering the transactions and returning ones that are ready to be included in the block. Transactions in the ready queue are used to construct a block with `BlockBuilder`.

  d) `BlockBuilder`([code](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/blob/master/client/block-builder/src/lib.rs)) uses the `apply_extrinsic`([code](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/blob/20a9b15cdbed4bf962a4447e8bfb812f766f2fbc/frame/executive/src/lib.rs#L235)) function to execute the transaction and apply the state changes in local memory.

  e) The constructed block is published to the network (where all other nodes run it through `execute_block`).

> 

Reviewer 2: I'd add a paragraph (or a sentence) about transaction propagation here as well:

```suggestion
Transactions from the `Ready` queue are also propagated (gossiped) to our peers over the network. We use the exact same ordering as for the pending block, since transactions that are in front of that queue are more considered more important (higher priority) and are more likely to be successfully executed in the next block.
```

## Transaction Validity

`validate_transaction` is called from the runtime, checks for a valid signature and nonce (or output for a UTXO chain) and returns a [`Result`](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/blob/20a9b15cdbed4bf962a4447e8bfb812f766f2fbc/primitives/runtime/src/transaction_validity.rs#L150). `validate_transaction` checks transactions in isolation, so it will not catch errors like the same output being spent twice.

> Although it is possible, `validate_transaction` does not check if calls to modules will succeed. It is a potential DoS vector since all transactions in the network will be passed into `validate_transaction`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although it is possible, `validate_transaction` does not check whether calls to pallets will succeed. It is a potential DoS vector since all transactions in the network will be passed into `validate_transaction`.
```

title: Transaction Pool
---

The transaction pool contains all transactions (signed and unsigned) broadcasted to the network that have been received and validated by the local node.

**Validity**

The transaction pool checks for transaction validity. Note that `validity` of the transaction is not hard-wired to the transaction pool, but is defined by the runtime. Example validity checks are:

* Checking if the Transaction Index (nonce) is correct.
* Checking if the account has enough funds to pay for the associated fees.
* Checking if the signature is valid.

The transaction pool also regularly checks validity of existing transactions within the pool. A transaction will be dropped from the pool if an invalid or expired mortal transaction is found.

**Sorting**

If the transaction is valid, the transaction queue sorts transactions into two groups:

>    - *Ready Queue* -  Contains transactions that can be included in a new pending block. For runtimes built with FRAME, the transactions must follow the exact order in the ready queue.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

- *Ready Queue* -  Contains transactions that can be included in a new pending block. For runtimes built with FRAME, the transactions must follow the exact order in the ready queue.
```

>    - *Future Queue* - Contains transactions that may become valid in the future. For example, a transaction may have a `nonce` that is too high for its account. This transaction will wait in the future queue until the preceding transactions are included in the chain.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- *Future Queue* - Contains transactions that may become valid in the future. For example, a transaction may have a `nonce` that is too high for its account. This transaction will wait in the future queue until the preceding transactions are included in the chain.
```

title: Transaction Pool
---

The transaction pool contains all transactions (signed and unsigned) broadcasted to the network that have been *received* and *validated* by the local node. The pool is responsible for:

1) Checking if transactions are valid. `validity` of the transaction is not hard wired to the transaction pool, but is defined by the runtime through the `validate_transaction` function ([code](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/blob/20a9b15cdbed4bf962a4447e8bfb812f766f2fbc/frame/executive/src/lib.rs#L304)). Example validity checks are:

* Transaction Index (nonce) correctness.
* The account has enough funds to pay for the associated fees.
* The signature is valid.

> 2) If the transaction is valid, sorting the transactions into 2 transaction queues:

Reviewer 3: The rendered version of this is borked. I would remove the `1)` and `2)` and just make two bold-faced lines with paragraphs/bullets underneath them. Like:
```
**Validity**

The transaction pool checks for transaction validity to... <why>. For example, it checks that:

**Sorting**

The transaction queue sorts transactions into two groups, the "ready queue" and the "future queue".
```

   - **Ready Queue** -  Contains transactions that can be included in a new pending block and must follow the *exact* order in the ready queue.

>    - **Future Queue** - Contains transactions that *seem* valid so far, but the full node has yet to see the remaining transactions it depends on. For example, *Transaction B* is in the future queue and can only be included in a block after *Transaction A* has been included. However, the node is yet to see *Transaction A* in its transaction pool.

Reviewer 3: I don't like this because it implies that *Transaction A* definitely exists, which it might not. 
```suggestion
   - **Future Queue** - Contains transactions that may become valid in the future. For example, a transaction may have a nonce that is too high for its account. This transaction will wait in the future queue until the preceding transactions are included in the chain.
```

> Full nodes in the network all have their own local transaction pool and transaction queues. Therefore, full nodes may have a different view of the queues and transactions in the network.

Reviewer 3: What's the difference between the transaction pool and the transaction queue? We've been using them interchangeably so it's confusing to show up like this.

Author: I've removed the paragraph

> Dependent on the runtime, strict ordering may not be a requirement. This could enable full nodes to implement different strategies on how they prioritize propagating transactions and how they're included into blocks.

Reviewer 3: This is confusing. You just said that exact ordering is important when building blocks. Seems this info could go into the prioritization section below.

Author: Clarified that strict ordering is for `Frame` based runtimes and reworded paragraph on line 22

## Transaction Dependencies

> Transaction dependencies are defined by the `requires` and `provides` parameters in the `ValidTransaction` [struct](https://substrate.dev/rustdocs/master/sp_runtime/transaction_validity/struct.ValidTransaction.html) to build a dependency graph of transactions. Together with `priority`, this allows the pool to traverse the graph and produce a valid linear ordering of transactions to be propagated and included in the next block.

Reviewer 3: - Active voice!
- We haven't seen `priority` yet.
- Not all of these will be propagated or included in the **next** block.
```suggestion
The `ValidTransaction` [struct](https://substrate.dev/rustdocs/master/sp_runtime/transaction_validity/struct.ValidTransaction.html) defines the `requires` and `provides` parameters to build a dependency graph of transactions. Together with `priority` (discussed below), this dependency graph allows the pool to produce a valid linear ordering of transactions.
```

> For `Frame` based runtimes, an account based system is used for transaction ordering. Every signed transaction needs to contain a nonce, which is incremented by 1 every time a new transaction is made. For example, the first transaction from a new account will have `nonce=0` and the second transaction will have `nonce=1`.

Reviewer 3: Active where possible!
```suggestion
For runtimes built with FRAME, the nodes order transactions with an account-based system. Every signed transaction needs to contain a nonce, which is incremented by 1 every time a new transaction is made. For example, the first transaction from a new account will have `nonce = 0` and the second transaction will have `nonce = 1`.
```

> At minimum, `Frame` transactions have a `provide` tag of `encode(sender ++ nonce)` and a `require` tag of `encode(sender ++ (nonce -1)) if nonce > 1`. Transactions do not `require` anything if `nonce=0`. As a result, all transactions coming from a single sender will form a sequence in which they should be included.

Reviewer 3: In the first sentence you define `require` as a noun but in the second you use it as a verb. I think in the second sentence it should not be in pre-formatted text.

Substrate supports multiple `provide` and `require` tags, so custom runtimes can create alternate dependency (ordering) schemes.

## Transaction Priority

> Transaction `priority` in the `ValidTransaction` [struct](https://substrate.dev/rustdocs/master/sp_runtime/transaction_validity/struct.ValidTransaction.html), helps determine the ordering of transactions that have their dependencies satisfied. The higher the priority number, the more important the transaction is.

Reviewer 3: - Should mention that this is for the "ready queue".
- Link to the weights page at the end here.
```suggestion
Transaction `priority` in the `ValidTransaction` [struct](https://substrate.dev/rustdocs/master/sp_runtime/transaction_validity/struct.ValidTransaction.html) helps determine the ordering of transactions that are in the ready queue. If a node is the next block author, it will order transactions from high to low priority in the next block until it reaches the weight or length limit of the block.
```

> `Priority` helps define the linear ordering of a graph in the case of one transaction unlocking multiple dependent transactions. For example, if we have two (or more) transactions that have their dependencies satisfied, then we use `priority` to choose the order for them.

Reviewer 3: - Does it "help define" or does it "define"? If the former, what other factors are used?
- Style note: If you are starting a sentence with `code` then you should not capitalize the first letter if the item you are talking about is not capitalized. Anything in pre-formatted text follows the grammar and syntax rules of the code. `this text` is a switch from English grammar to code grammar.

> For `Frame` based runtimes, `priority` is defined as the `fee` that the transaction is going to pay. For example:

Reviewer 3: Let's use FRAME as an acronym, it's not specific to code.
```suggestion
For FRAME-based runtimes, `priority` is defined as the `fee` that the transaction is going to pay. For example:
```

  * If we receive 2 transactions from *different* senders (with `nonce=0`), we use `priority` to determine which transaction is more important and included in the block first.

  * If we receive 2 transactions from the *same* sender with an identical `nonce`, only one transaction can be included on-chain. We use `priority` to choose the transaction with a higher `fee` to store in the transaction pool.

> 

Reviewer 3: Remove empty line between list items for common rendering.
```suggestion
```

Author: I think you may have meant line 44 to delete. I've deleted line 44

> Note that the pool does not know about fees, accounts or signatures - it only deals with the validity of the transaction and the abstract notion of `priority`, `requires` and `provides` parameters. All other details are defined by the runtime via the `validate transction` implementation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that the pool does not know about fees, accounts, or signatures - it only deals with the validity of the transaction and the abstract notion of the `priority`, `requires`, and `provides` parameters. All other details are defined by the runtime via the `validate transaction` implementation.
```

## Transaction Lifecycle

> There are two paths a transaction can follow:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A transaction can follow two paths:
```

> 1. **A block is received from the network**

Reviewer 3: Same rendering comment as above. Let's make these a new subsection, like
```
### Block Received from Network
```

>   The block is run through `execute_block`([code](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/blob/20a9b15cdbed4bf962a4447e8bfb812f766f2fbc/frame/executive/src/lib.rs#L196)), and the entire block either succeeds or fails.

Reviewer 3: I don't think you should link to code here. Just say we execute the block and it either succeeds or fails.

> 2. **A block is produced by our own node**

Reviewer 3: I would reverse the order of these (so make this (1)). The lead-in says there are two paths a **transaction** can take and then you start talking about executing **blocks.**

Ditto about removing code in this section. Maybe `BlockBuilder` should link to the reference docs on that.

  c) The pool is responsible for ordering the transactions and returning ones that are ready to be included in the block. Transactions in the ready queue are used to construct a block with `BlockBuilder`.

  d) `BlockBuilder`([code](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/blob/master/client/block-builder/src/lib.rs)) uses the `apply_extrinsic`([code](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/blob/20a9b15cdbed4bf962a4447e8bfb812f766f2fbc/frame/executive/src/lib.rs#L235)) function to execute the transaction and apply the state changes in local memory. Transactions from the `ready` queue are also propagated (gossiped) to peers over the network. We use the exact ordering as the pending block since transactions in the front of the queue have a higher priority and are more likely to be successfully executed in the next block.

  e) The constructed block is published to the network (where all other nodes run it through `execute_block`).

> Note that transactions are not removed from the ready queue when blocks are authored, but removed *only* on block import. This is due to the possibility that a recently authored block may be orphaned off.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that transactions are not removed from the ready queue when blocks are authored, but removed *only* on block import. This is due to the possibility that a recently-authored block may not make it into the canonical chain.
```

## Transaction Validity

`validate_transaction` is called from the runtime, checks for a valid signature and nonce (or output for a UTXO chain) and returns a [`Result`](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/blob/20a9b15cdbed4bf962a4447e8bfb812f766f2fbc/primitives/runtime/src/transaction_validity.rs#L150). `validate_transaction` checks transactions in isolation, so it will not catch errors like the same output being spent twice.

Although it is possible, `validate_transaction` does not check whether calls to pallets will succeed. It is a potential DoS vector since all transactions in the network will be passed into `validate_transaction`.

The `validate_transaction` function should focus on providing the necessary information for the pool to order and prioritize transactions, and quickly reject all transactions that are invalid or outdated. The function will be called frequently, potentially multiple times for the same transaction. It is also possible for `validate_transaction` to fail a dependent transaction that would pass `execute_block` if it were executed in the correct order.

## Further Reading

> - [Extrinsics](conceptual/node/extrinsics.md)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

- [Extrinsics](conceptual/node/extrinsics.md)
```

Transaction `priority` in the `ValidTransaction` [struct](https://substrate.dev/rustdocs/master/sp_runtime/transaction_validity/struct.ValidTransaction.html) determines the ordering of transactions that are in the ready queue. If a node is the next block author, it will order transactions from high to low priority in the next block until it reaches the weight or length limit of the block.

`priority` defines the linear ordering of a graph in the case of one transaction unlocking multiple dependent transactions. For example, if we have two (or more) transactions that have their dependencies satisfied, then we use `priority` to choose the order for them.

For runtimes built with FRAME, `priority` is defined as the `fee` that the transaction is going to pay. For example:

  * If we receive 2 transactions from *different* senders (with `nonce=0`), we use `priority` to determine which transaction is more important and included in the block first.
  * If we receive 2 transactions from the *same* sender with an identical `nonce`, only one transaction can be included on-chain. We use `priority` to choose the transaction with a higher `fee` to store in the transaction pool.

> Note that the pool does not know about fees, accounts, or signatures - it only deals with the validity of the transaction and the abstract notion of the `priority`, `requires`, and `provides` parameters. All other details are defined by the runtime via the `validate transaction` implementation.

Reviewer 3: Isn't validate transaction a function? So, `validate_transaction`.

## Transaction Lifecycle

A transaction can follow two paths:

### Block Produced by our Node

>   1) Our node listens for transactions on the network.

Reviewer 3: This is a tiny nit, but I think most lists use a period after each number and no empty line between items. It may not matter on docusaurus (some markdown renderers will end up with the same result) but if we are going to be switching platforms, then we should try to maintain a common format. So,
```
1. Words
2. Werds
3. Wurds
```

* Transaction Index (nonce) correctness.
* The account has enough funds to pay for the associated fees.
* The signature is valid.

2) If the transaction is valid, sorting the transactions into 2 transaction queues:
   - **Ready Queue** -  Contains transactions that can be included in a new pending block and must follow the *exact* order in the ready queue.

   - **Future Queue** - Contains transactions that *seem* valid so far, but the full node has yet to see the remaining transactions it depends on. For example, *Transaction B* is in the future queue and can only be included in a block after *Transaction A* has been included. However, the node is yet to see *Transaction A* in its transaction pool.

Full nodes in the network all have their own local transaction pool and transaction queues. Therefore, full nodes may have a different view of the queues and transactions in the network.

Dependent on the runtime, strict ordering may not be a requirement. This could enable full nodes to implement different strategies on how they prioritise propagating transactions and how they're included into blocks.

## Transaction Dependencies

> Transaction [dependencies](https://substrate.dev/rustdocs/master/sp_runtime/transaction_validity/struct.ValidTransaction.html) are defined by the `requires` and `provides` parameters in `ValidTransaction` to build a dependency graph of transactions. Together with `priority`, this allows the pool to traverse the graph and produce a valid linear ordering of transactions to be propagated and included in the next block.

Reviewer: Seems like the link should be on the `ValidTransaction` rather than "dependencies"  since that's the struct you're linking to

  e) The constructed block is published to the network (where all other nodes run it through `execute_block`).

Note that transactions are not removed from the ready queue when blocks are authored, but removed *only* on block import. This is due to the possibility that a recently authored block may be orphaned off.

## Transaction Validity

`validate_transaction` is called from the runtime, checks for a valid signature and nonce (or output for a UTXO chain) and returns a [`Result`](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/blob/20a9b15cdbed4bf962a4447e8bfb812f766f2fbc/primitives/runtime/src/transaction_validity.rs#L150). `validate_transaction` checks transactions in isolation, so it will not catch errors like the same output being spent twice.

Although it is possible, `validate_transaction` does not check whether calls to pallets will succeed. It is a potential DoS vector since all transactions in the network will be passed into `validate_transaction`.

> The `validate_transaction` function should focus on providing the necessary information for the pool to order and prioritise transactions, and quickly reject all transactions that are invalid or outdated. The function will be called frequently, potentially multiple times for the same transaction. It is also possible for `validate_transaction` to fail a dependent transaction that would pass `execute_block` if it were executed in the correct order.

Reviewer: Devhub prefers American spelling. prioritize with a z

Author: ok no worries
